{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset1 Cambria Math;}{\f3\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Symbol;}{\f4\fnil\fcharset2 Wingdings;}{\f5\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Symbol;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}{\*\mmathPr\mmathFont2\mwrapIndent1440 }\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9  \par
\par
Overview of Computer Architecture\par
What is Computer Architecture\par
Computer architecture refers to the conceptual design and functional structure of a computer system.\par
It defines how hardware components such as the CPU, memory, input/output devices, and storage interact with each other to execute programs effectively.\par
In simple words, computer architecture explains how a computer system is organized and how it performs operations internally.\par
\par
Importance of Computer Architecture in Software Development\par
Understanding computer architecture is essential for software developers because:\par
\f1\bullet\tab Software performance depends on how hardware executes instructions\par
\bullet\tab Efficient memory and CPU usage improves application speed\par
\bullet\tab Helps in identifying performance bottlenecks\par
\bullet\tab Necessary for writing optimized, scalable, and reliable applications\par
\bullet\tab Important for backend systems, cloud services, and enterprise applications\par
In corporate environments like Wipro, developers are expected to write software that is hardware aware, not just functionally correct.\par
\par
Basic Terminology\par
\bullet\tab Hardware: Physical components of a computer system\par
\bullet\tab Software: Set of programs that run on hardware\par
\bullet\tab CPU: Executes instructions\par
\bullet\tab Memory (RAM): Temporary storage for running programs\par
\bullet\tab Storage: Permanent data storage (HDD/SSD)\par
\bullet\tab Input Devices: Keyboard, mouse\par
\bullet\tab Output Devices: Monitor, printer\par
\par
Central Processing Unit (CPU)\par
The CPU (Central Processing Unit) is the core component of a computer system responsible for executing instructions, performing calculations, and controlling system operations.\par
It acts as the brain of the computer.\par
\par
CPU Components and Their Functions\par
1. Control Unit (CU)\par
\bullet\tab Fetches instructions from memory\par
\bullet\tab Decodes instructions\par
\bullet\tab Controls data flow between CPU, memory, and I/O devices\par
2. Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU)\par
\bullet\tab Performs arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division)\par
\bullet\tab Performs logical operations (AND, OR, NOT, comparison)\par
3. Registers\par
\bullet\tab Small, high speed memory inside CPU\par
\bullet\tab Stores instructions, data, addresses, and intermediate results\par
4. Cache Memory\par
\bullet\tab Stores frequently used data and instructions\par
\bullet\tab Faster than RAM\par
\bullet\tab Reduces CPU waiting time\par
\par
How a CPU Executes Instructions\par
CPU executes instructions using the Instruction Cycle, also called the Fetch Decode Execute cycle.\par
Step 1: Fetch\par
\bullet\tab Instruction is fetched from memory\par
\bullet\tab Stored in the Instruction Register\par
\bullet\tab Program Counter points to the next instruction\par
Step 2: Decode\par
\bullet\tab Control Unit decodes the instruction\par
\bullet\tab Determines required operation and operands\par
Step 3: Execute\par
\bullet\tab ALU performs the operation\par
\bullet\tab Data is processed\par
\bullet\tab Result is generated\par
Step 4: Store (Write Back)\par
\bullet\tab Result is stored in register or memory\par
\bullet\tab Program Counter is updated\par
This cycle repeats continuously until program execution completes.\par
\par
CPU Performance Factors\par
1. Clock Speed\par
\bullet\tab Measures how many cycles CPU executes per second\par
\bullet\tab Higher clock speed \f2\u8594?\f0  faster execution\par
2. Number of Cores\par
\f1\bullet\tab Multi core CPUs execute tasks in parallel\par
\bullet\tab Improves multitasking and performance\par
3. Cache Size\par
\bullet\tab Larger cache \f2\u8594?\f0  fewer memory accesses\par
\f1\bullet\tab Faster data availability\par
4. Architecture and Instruction Set\par
\bullet\tab Efficient instruction sets improve performance\par
\bullet\tab Examples: x86, ARM\par
5. Word Length\par
\bullet\tab Amount of data CPU can process at a time\par
\bullet\tab 64 bit CPUs handle more data efficiently\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
 \par
Client Layer\par
\bullet\tab The client uses a browser (Chrome, Edge, Firefox, etc.).\par
\bullet\tab The browser is used to send requests and receive responses.\par
\bullet\tab Users interact with the application through the browser.\par
\par
UI Layer (Presentation Layer)\par
\bullet\tab This layer is responsible for presentation logic.\par
\bullet\tab Technologies used: \par
o\tab Angular\par
o\tab React\par
\bullet\tab It handles: \par
o\tab User interface (pages, forms, buttons)\par
o\tab User input\par
o\tab Sending API requests to the backend\par
\bullet\tab It does not contain business logic or database access.\par
\par
API Layer (Business Logic Layer)\par
\bullet\tab This layer contains the core business logic.\par
\bullet\tab Frameworks used: \par
o\tab Spring Boot\par
o\tab FastAPI\par
o\tab Django\par
\bullet\tab Responsibilities: \par
o\tab Validating requests\par
o\tab Applying business rules\par
o\tab Processing data\par
o\tab Sending responses back to the UI layer\par
\bullet\tab Acts as a bridge between UI and Database.\par
Database Layer\par
\bullet\tab Used for data storage and retrieval.\par
\bullet\tab Stores: \par
o\tab User data\par
o\tab Application data\par
o\tab Transaction data\par
\bullet\tab The API layer interacts directly with the database, not the UI layer.\par
\par
Flow of the Application\par
1.\tab User performs an action in the browser\par
2.\tab Request goes to the UI layer\par
3.\tab UI sends request to the API layer\par
4.\tab API processes logic and interacts with the database\par
5.\tab Response flows back: \par
o\tab Database \f2\u8594?\f0  API \f2\u8594?\f0  UI \f2\u8594?\f0  Browser\par
\par
\par
\par
 \par
\par
In large web applications like Amazon, many users access the same pages repeatedly, such as the home page, offers page, product listings, etc. If every request goes directly to the database, it increases load on the database and slows down the application. To avoid this problem, cache is used.\par
Cache is a temporary memory that stores frequently accessed data so that it can be served quickly without querying the database again.\par
Why Cache is Used\par
\f1\bullet\tab Database access is slow compared to memory access\par
\bullet\tab Repeated queries for the same data waste time and resources\par
\bullet\tab High traffic can overload the database\par
\bullet\tab Cache helps in faster response and better performance\par
Therefore, cache is used to improve speed, scalability, and user experience.\par
Position of Cache in the Architecture\par
In the given diagram:\par
\bullet\tab Client sends request through the browser\par
\bullet\tab Cache is present in the UI layer (Amazon server side)\par
\bullet\tab API layer and database are accessed only when required\par
Cache acts as a middle layer between UI and API\par
\par
How Cache Works (Flow Explanation)\par
First Request (Cache Miss)\par
1.\tab User opens amazon.in in the browser\par
2.\tab UI layer checks cache\par
3.\tab Data is not present in cache (cache miss)\par
4.\tab Request is sent to API layer\par
5.\tab API fetches data from database\par
6.\tab Data is returned to UI\par
7.\tab UI stores the data in cache\par
8.\tab Page is shown to the user\par
\par
Next Requests (Cache Hit)\par
1.\tab Another user opens the same page\par
2.\tab UI layer checks cache\par
3.\tab Data is found in cache (cache hit)\par
4.\tab Data is directly returned to UI\par
5.\tab Page is shown immediately\par
\f3\u10145?\f0  No API call\par
\f3\u10145?\f0  No database access\par
\par
\par
Why Cache is Faster Than Database\par
\f1\bullet\tab Cache stores data in RAM (memory)\par
\bullet\tab Database stores data on disk\par
\bullet\tab Memory access is much faster than disk access\par
\bullet\tab Cache avoids query execution and network delay\par
Because of this, cache provides data in milliseconds, while database access takes more time.\par
\par
Advantages of Using Cache\par
\bullet\tab Faster page loading\par
\bullet\tab Reduced database load\par
\bullet\tab Better handling of high traffic\par
\bullet\tab Improved system performance\par
\bullet\tab Cost effective and scalable\par
Example\par
Amazon home page data like banners and offers does not change for every second. So this data is stored in cache and reused for many users instead of fetching again from database.\par
\par
Short Conclusion\par
Cache improves application performance by storing frequently used data in memory and serving it quickly without repeatedly accessing the database.\par
\par
 \par
\par
Input / Output (I/O) Systems\par
Overview of I/O Systems\par
An Input/Output (I/O) system is responsible for enabling communication between a computer system and the external world. It allows the system to receive input, process data, and deliver output efficiently.\par
In a computer system, the CPU cannot directly interact with devices like keyboards, displays, disks, or network cards. The I/O system acts as an interface that manages this interaction in a controlled and optimized manner.\par
________________________________________\par
Purpose of I/O Systems\par
The main objectives of an I/O system are:\par
\bullet\tab To transfer data between CPU, memory, and external devices\par
\bullet\tab To hide hardware complexity from the user and application programs\par
\bullet\tab To improve system performance and CPU utilization\par
\bullet\tab To support multiple devices simultaneously\par
\par
\par
\par
Components Involved in I/O Communication\par
1.\tab CPU\par
o\tab Initiates I/O operations\par
o\tab Executes instructions related to data transfer\par
o\tab Controls the overall operation of the system\par
2.\tab Main Memory\par
o\tab Temporarily stores data being transferred\par
o\tab Acts as an intermediate buffer between CPU and I/O devices\par
3.\tab I/O Devices\par
o\tab Input devices (keyboard, mouse, scanner)\par
o\tab Output devices (monitor, printer)\par
o\tab Storage devices (SSD, HDD)\par
o\tab Network devices\par
4.\tab I/O Controllers\par
o\tab Specialized hardware that manages communication between CPU and I/O devices\par
o\tab Reduces direct CPU involvement\par
5.\tab System Bus\par
o\tab Provides data, address, and control paths between CPU, memory, and I/O devices\par
\par
Communication Between CPU, Memory, and I/O Devices\par
The communication between CPU, memory, and I/O devices follows a structured flow:\par
1.\tab The CPU issues an I/O request\par
2.\tab The request is forwarded to the I/O controller\par
3.\tab Data is transferred between the I/O device and memory\par
4.\tab The CPU is notified once the operation is complete\par
To improve efficiency, modern systems use interrupts and Direct Memory Access (DMA) so that the CPU does not remain idle waiting for I/O operations to finish.\par
\par
Modes of I/O Communication\par
1. Programmed I/O\par
\bullet\tab CPU actively waits and checks for device status\par
\bullet\tab Simple but inefficient\par
\bullet\tab Causes CPU wastage\par
2. Interrupt Driven I/O\par
\bullet\tab Device interrupts CPU when ready\par
\bullet\tab Improves CPU efficiency\par
\bullet\tab Widely used in modern systems\par
3. Direct Memory Access (DMA)\par
\bullet\tab Data transferred directly between device and memory\par
\bullet\tab CPU involvement is minimal\par
\bullet\tab Used for high speed devices such as disks and network cards\par
\par
Importance of I/O Systems in Real World Applications\par
In enterprise grade applications:\par
\bullet\tab Large volumes of data are transferred continuously\par
\bullet\tab Efficient I/O handling improves system throughput\par
\bullet\tab Poor I/O design leads to bottlenecks and performance degradation\par
Therefore, optimized I/O systems are critical for scalability, reliability, and performance, especially in corporate environments like Wipro projects.\par
\par
Summary\par
An I/O system enables communication between the CPU, memory, and external devices. It manages data transfer efficiently using controllers, interrupts, and DMA, ensuring optimal system performance and resource utilization.\par
\par
\par
 \par
Understanding Computer Networking\par
What is Networking\par
Computer networking is the practice of connecting two or more computers or devices so that they can share data, resources, and services with each other.\par
A network allows systems to communicate using standard rules (protocols) over wired or wireless media. In today\rquote s corporate environment, networking is the backbone for applications, cloud services, databases, and enterprise systems.\par
\par
Why Networking is Important\par
Networking is important because it enables:\par
\bullet\tab Resource sharing (files, printers, servers)\par
\bullet\tab Communication (emails, messaging, video calls)\par
\bullet\tab Centralized data access\par
\bullet\tab Scalability and collaboration\par
\bullet\tab Internet and cloud connectivity\par
In companies like Wipro, almost every application is network dependent, whether it is internal tools or client facing systems.\par
\par
Basic Networking Concepts\par
1. Node\par
Any device connected to a network (computer, server, mobile, router).\par
2. Network\par
A group of interconnected devices that can communicate with each other.\par
3. IP Address\par
A unique address assigned to each device to identify it on a network.\par
\bullet\tab Private IP \endash  Used within an internal network\par
\bullet\tab Public IP \endash  Used to communicate over the internet\par
4. MAC Address\par
A physical, unique identifier of a network interface card (NIC).\par
5. Bandwidth\par
The maximum data transfer capacity of a network.\par
6. Latency\par
The time taken for data to travel from source to destination.\par
\par
7. Packet\par
Data is broken into small units called packets before transmission.\par
\par
8. Router and Switch\par
\bullet\tab Switch \endash  Connects devices within the same network\par
\bullet\tab Router \endash  Connects different networks (LAN to Internet)\par
\par
Network Types\par
\bullet\tab LAN (Local Area Network) \endash  Office or building network\par
\bullet\tab WAN (Wide Area Network) \endash  Internet is the best example\par
\bullet\tab MAN (Metropolitan Area Network) \endash  City level network\par
\par
Network Models\par
Network models provide a layer based structure for communication.\par
\par
1. OSI Model (7 Layers)\par
1.\tab Physical \endash  Transmission of raw bits\par
2.\tab Data Link \endash  MAC addressing and error detection\par
3.\tab Network \endash  IP addressing and routing\par
4.\tab Transport \endash  End to end communication (TCP/UDP)\par
5.\tab Session \endash  Session management\par
6.\tab Presentation \endash  Data formatting and encryption\par
7.\tab Application \endash  User interaction layer\par
The OSI model is mainly used for understanding and learning.\par
\par
2. TCP/IP Model (4 Layers)\par
1.\tab Network Interface\par
2.\tab Internet\par
3.\tab Transport\par
4.\tab Application\par
TCP/IP is the practical model used in real world networks, including enterprise and cloud systems.\par
\par
\par
Network Protocols\par
Protocols are rules that define how data is transmitted.\par
Common Protocols\par
\bullet\tab TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)\par
Reliable, connection oriented, error checked\par
\bullet\tab UDP (User Datagram Protocol)\par
Faster, connectionless, less reliable\par
\bullet\tab HTTP / HTTPS\par
Used for web communication\par
\bullet\tab FTP\par
Used for file transfer\par
\bullet\tab DNS\par
Converts domain names to IP addresses\par
\par
Importance of Networking in Software Development\par
For software developers, networking knowledge is important to:\par
\bullet\tab Design client server applications\par
\bullet\tab Understand APIs and microservices\par
\bullet\tab Work with cloud platforms\par
\bullet\tab Debug connectivity issues\par
\bullet\tab Build scalable distributed systems\par
In corporate projects, applications are rarely standalone. They operate in networked environments.\par
\par
Summary\par
Computer networking enables communication between devices using standardized protocols and layered architectures. Understanding networking concepts, models, and protocols is essential for developing, deploying, and maintaining enterprise level software systems.\par
\par
\par
 \par
Software Development Life Cycle \endash  Practical Flow Explanation\par
This cycle shows how a software requirement moves from client idea to production and maintenance.\par
\par
1. Requirements Document Phase\par
Who is involved\par
\bullet\tab Client / Business Stakeholders\par
\bullet\tab Architect (Arch)\par
\bullet\tab Sometimes Business Analyst (BA)\par
What happens\par
\bullet\tab Client explains: \par
o\tab What problem they want to solve\par
o\tab What features they expect\par
\bullet\tab Requirements are shared in: \par
o\tab Text documents\par
o\tab Wireframes (screens, UI flow diagrams)\par
Output\par
\bullet\tab Requirements Document\par
\bullet\tab Clear understanding of: \par
o\tab Functional requirements\par
o\tab High level expectations\par
 This document is understood and validated by the Architect.\par
No coding happens here\par
\par
2.  Technical Design Document Phase\par
Who is involved\par
\bullet\tab Architect (Arch)\par
\bullet\tab Technical Lead (TL)\par
What happens\par
\bullet\tab Requirements are converted into technical design\par
\bullet\tab Decisions are made on: \par
o\tab How many classes\par
o\tab How many interfaces\par
o\tab How many components / modules\par
o\tab Architecture pattern (monolith, microservices, etc.)\par
o\tab Technology stack\par
Output\par
\bullet\tab Technical Design Document (TDD)\par
\bullet\tab Blueprint of the application\par
 This document guides developers during coding.\par
 Still no coding\par
\par
3.  Coding Phase\par
Who is involved\par
\bullet\tab Senior Software Engineer (SSE)\par
\bullet\tab Software Engineer (SE)\par
What happens\par
\bullet\tab Developers: \par
o\tab Write code based on Technical Document\par
o\tab Implement business logic\par
o\tab Follow coding standards\par
o\tab Do unit testing\par
Output\par
\bullet\tab Working code\par
\bullet\tab Features implemented as per design\par
Code is handed over to testing team.\par
4. Testing Phase\par
Who is involved\par
\bullet\tab QA Team / Testing Team\par
What happens\par
\bullet\tab Testers: \par
o\tab Verify functionality\par
o\tab Find bugs and defects\par
o\tab Perform: \par
\f4\'a7\f0\tab Functional testing\par
\f4\'a7\f0\tab Regression testing\par
\f4\'a7\f0\tab Sometimes performance testing\par
Output\par
\f1\bullet\tab Bug reports (if any)\par
\bullet\tab Test results\par
\bullet\tab QA sign off (if passed)\par
 If bugs are found, code goes back to developers.\par
\par
5.\tab Deployment Phase (GO LIVE)\par
Who is involved\par
\bullet\tab DevOps Team\par
\bullet\tab Release Team\par
\bullet\tab Sometimes Developers\par
What happens\par
\bullet\tab Tested code is deployed to: \par
o\tab Production Environment\par
\bullet\tab Application becomes available to end users\par
\bullet\tab This stage is called GO LIVE\par
Output\par
\bullet\tab Live application\par
\bullet\tab Users start using the software\par
\par
6.\tab Maintenance Phase\par
Who is involved\par
\bullet\tab Maintenance Team\par
\bullet\tab Support Team\par
\bullet\tab Sometimes Developers\par
What happens\par
\bullet\tab Any issues reported by users are handled\par
\bullet\tab Bug fixes\par
\bullet\tab Minor enhancements\par
\bullet\tab Performance tuning\par
Output\par
\bullet\tab Stable system\par
\bullet\tab Continuous improvements\par
 This phase continues throughout the life of the application.\par
\par
Complete Flow in One Line (Very Important)\par
Client gives requirements \f2\u8594?\f0  Architect designs \f2\u8594?\f0  Developers code \f2\u8594?\f0  QA tests \f2\u8594?\f0  Code goes live \f2\u8594?\f0  Maintenance handles issues.\par
\par
 \par
What is Python?\par
Python is a high level, interpreted, and general purpose programming language.\par
It is easy to learn and use because of its simple syntax and readability.\par
Python supports multiple programming paradigms such as procedural, object oriented, and functional programming.\par
It is widely used in web development, data analysis, automation, artificial intelligence, and machine learning.\par
\par
Advantages of Python\par
1.\tab Easy to Learn and Use\par
Python has simple syntax, which makes it beginner friendly.\par
2.\tab Interpreted Language\par
Code is executed line by line, making debugging easier.\par
3.\tab Large Standard Library\par
Python provides many built in libraries and frameworks.\par
4.\tab Platform Independent\par
Python programs can run on Windows, Linux, and macOS.\par
5.\tab Strong Community Support\par
Large community means more tutorials, tools, and help.\par
6.\tab Supports AI and ML\par
Python has powerful libraries like NumPy, Pandas, TensorFlow, and Scikit learn.\par
\par
How is Python useful in AI and ML World? (5 Scenarios)\par
1.\tab Data Analysis and Preprocessing\par
Python is used to clean, analyze, and prepare data using libraries like Pandas and NumPy.\par
2.\tab Machine Learning Model Development\par
Libraries such as Scikit learn help in building and training ML models easily.\par
3.\tab Deep Learning Applications\par
Python supports deep learning using TensorFlow, Keras, and PyTorch.\par
4.\tab Natural Language Processing (NLP)\par
Python is used in chatbots, language translation, and sentiment analysis using NLTK and spaCy.\par
5.\tab Computer Vision\par
Python is used for image recognition and face detection using OpenCV and TensorFlow.\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
 \par
What is AAA Pattern?\par
AAA stands for:\par
1.\tab Arrange\par
2.\tab Act\par
3.\tab Assert\par
It is a standard structure for writing unit test cases so that tests are:\par
\f1\bullet\tab Easy to read\par
\bullet\tab Easy to understand\par
\bullet\tab Easy to maintain\par
________________________________________\par
\f5\u-10179?\u-8903?\f0  Explanation Using Your Fan Example\par
System: Computer Fan\par
________________________________________\par
1.\tab Arrange \f1\endash  Set up the environment\par
\ldblquote Get Electricity Board \emdash  Arrange the Env\rdblquote\par
\bullet\tab You prepare everything needed before the action\par
\bullet\tab Nothing is tested here yet\par
\f5\u-10179?\u-8903?\f0  In real life:\par
\f1\bullet\tab Power supply is available\par
\bullet\tab Fan is properly connected\par
\bullet\tab Switch is off\par
\f5\u-10179?\u-8903?\f0  In unit testing:\par
\f1\bullet\tab Create objects\par
\bullet\tab Initialize variables\par
\bullet\tab Set test data\par
________________________________________\par
2.\tab Act \endash  Perform the action\par
\ldblquote Switch the button on \emdash  Take Action\rdblquote\par
\bullet\tab You perform one specific action\par
\bullet\tab This is the behavior you want to test\par
\f5\u-10179?\u-8903?\f0  In real life:\par
\f1\bullet\tab You turn ON the switch\par
\f5\u-10179?\u-8903?\f0  In unit testing:\par
\f1\bullet\tab Call the method/function being tested\par
________________________________________\par
3.\tab Assert \endash  Verify the result\par
\ldblquote Check whether the fan is rotating or not\rdblquote\par
\bullet\tab You verify the outcome\par
\bullet\tab This decides if the test passes or fails\par
\f5\u-10179?\u-8903?\f0  In real life:\par
\f1\bullet\tab Fan rotates \f2\u8594?\f0  \f3\u9989?\f0  Test passed\par
\f1\bullet\tab Fan does not rotate \f2\u8594?\f0  \f3\u10060?\f0  Test failed\par
\f5\u-10179?\u-8903?\f0  In unit testing:\par
\f1\bullet\tab Compare expected output with actual output\par
\par
\par
\f5\u-10179?\u-8903?\f0  AAA Pattern in Python Unit Test (Example)\par
Python\par
def test_add():\par
# Arrange\par
a = 2\par
b = 3\par
\par
# Act\par
result = add(a, b)\par
\par
# Assert\par
assert result == 5\par
Show more lines\par
Mapping:\par
\f1\bullet\tab Arrange \f2\u8594?\f0  prepare inputs\par
\f1\bullet\tab Act \f2\u8594?\f0  call add(a, b)\par
\f1\bullet\tab Assert \f2\u8594?\f0  check result\par
________________________________________\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
Date: 08-05-2026/FRIDAY.\par
\tab  \par
\par
1. Why Probability in Machine Learning?\par
Machine Learning works with real world data, which is uncertain, noisy, and incomplete. Probability allows ML models to handle uncertainty and make data driven predictions instead of fixed rules.\par
Simple Example\par
When predicting whether an email is spam, the model does not say \ldblquote YES or NO\rdblquote  immediately. Instead, it calculates the probability that the email is spam (e.g., 92% spam).\par
Real World Coding Example\par
\f1\bullet\tab Spam classification using Naive Bayes\par
\bullet\tab Customer churn prediction (probability that a user will leave)\par
\bullet\tab Predicting rain probability in weather models\par
 \par
\par
\par
2. Mean, Median, and Mode\par
These are measures of central tendency, used to understand where data is centered.\par
Mean\par
Average of all values.\par
Example:\par
Student marks: 60, 70, 80\par
Mean = (60 + 70 + 80) / 3 = 70\par
Median\par
Middle value after sorting.\par
Example:\par
Marks: 40, 60, 100\par
Median = 60 (helps when outliers exist)\par
Mode\par
Most frequent value.\par
Example:\par
Ratings: 5, 4, 4, 3\par
Mode = 4\par
Real World Coding Example\par
\bullet\tab Calculating average salary (mean)\par
\bullet\tab Finding typical house prices ignoring outliers (median)\par
\bullet\tab Most purchased product (mode)\par
 In ML preprocessing, these are used for:\par
\bullet\tab Data understanding\par
\bullet\tab Missing value imputation\par
\par
3. Variance and Standard Deviation\par
These measure how spread out data values are.\par
Variance\par
Average of squared distances from the mean.\par
Standard Deviation\par
Square root of variance, easier to interpret.\par
Simple Example\par
Marks: 50, 50, 50\par
\f2\u8594?\f0  Low variance (consistent performance)\par
Marks: 10, 50, 90\par
\f2\u8594?\f0  High variance (inconsistent performance)\par
Real World Coding Example\par
\f1\bullet\tab Detecting abnormal transactions in fraud detection\par
\bullet\tab Feature scaling in ML (standardization)\par
\bullet\tab Measuring risk in stock prices\par
 In ML, high variance data may need normalization.\par
\par
4. Probability Basics\par
Probability measures the chance of an event occurring (0 to 1).\par
Formula\par
Probability = Favourable Outcomes / Total Outcomes\par
Example\par
Rolling a die\par
\bullet\tab Probability of getting 3 = 1/6\par
Real World Coding Example\par
\bullet\tab Clicking an ad\par
\bullet\tab User buying a product\par
\bullet\tab Predicting success/failure of an API request\par
 ML models internally calculate probabilities for each class.\par
\par
\par
5. Conditional Probability\par
Conditional probability answers:\par
\ldblquote What is the probability of A given B has already happened?\rdblquote\par
Representation\par
P(A | B)\par
Simple Example\par
\bullet\tab Probability of passing exam given attendance > 80%\par
Real World Coding Example\par
\bullet\tab Probability of disease given symptoms\par
\bullet\tab Probability of purchase given user visited the website\par
\bullet\tab Probability of spam given certain words appear in email\par
 This is the foundation of many ML classifiers.\par
\par
6. Bayes Theorem\par
Bayes theorem updates probability when new evidence appears.\par
Formula\par
P(A | B) = (P(B | A) \f0\'d7 P(A)) / P(B)\par
Simple Explanation\par
\f1\bullet\tab P(A) \f2\u8594?\f0  Prior probability (before data)\par
\f1\bullet\tab P(A | B) \f2\u8594?\f0  Updated probability (after seeing data)\par
Real World Coding Example\par
\f1\bullet\tab Email spam filtering (Naive Bayes)\par
\bullet\tab Medical diagnosis systems\par
\bullet\tab Sentiment analysis\par
 ML models keep updating predictions based on new data.\par
\par
7. Normal Distribution\par
Normal distribution is a bell shaped curve where:\par
\bullet\tab Mean = Median = Mode\par
\bullet\tab Most data lies near the mean\par
Example\par
Student height, exam marks, sensor readings often follow normal distribution.\par
Why it matters in ML\par
\bullet\tab Many algorithms assume normally distributed data\par
\bullet\tab Helps in anomaly detection\par
\bullet\tab Used in probability density estimation\par
Real World Coding Example\par
\bullet\tab Detecting abnormal CPU usage\par
\bullet\tab Identifying outliers in test scores\par
\bullet\tab Modelling noise in signals\par
\par
8. Use Cases Where Probability Is Used (With Coding Context)\par
Use Case\tab How Probability is Used\par
Spam Detection\tab Probability email is spam\par
Recommendation Systems\tab Probability user likes an item\par
Medical Diagnosis\tab Probability of disease\par
Fraud Detection\tab Probability of transaction being fake\par
Stock Prediction\tab Probability of price movement\par
Weather Forecasting\tab Chance of rain\par
In ML code, predictions often look like:\par
Plain Text\par
Class: Fraud\par
Probability: 0.87\par
 \par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
 \par
\par
Vectors\par
\par
\ldblquote A vector is a one dimensional array used to store related data like marks or salaries.\rdblquote\par
\par
Example:\par
import numpy as np\par
marks = np.array([85, 90, 78])\par
print(marks)\par
Output\par
[85 90 78]\par
\par
Key point:\par
\bullet\tab Vectors are 1 D (ndim = 1)\par
\bullet\tab Operations apply to all elements at once\par
\par
\par
\par
Matrices\par
\ldblquote A matrix is a two dimensional structure with rows and columns, often used to represent tabular data.\rdblquote\par
Example:\par
\par
matrix = np.array([\par
[80, 70, 90],\par
[60, 75, 88],\par
[95, 85, 91]\par
])\par
print(matrix)\par
Output\par
[[80 70 90]\par
 [60 75 88]\par
 [95 85 91]]\par
\par
Key point:\par
\bullet\tab Matrix = 2 D array\par
\bullet\tab Used to store multiple records and features\par
\par
Matrix Operations\par
\par
\ldblquote NumPy supports addition, subtraction, and multiplication of matrices.\rdblquote\par
Element wise operations\par
A + B\par
A - B\par
A * B\par
Matrix multiplication\par
np.matmul(A, B)\par
\par
Key rule:\par
Columns of A must match rows of B\par
Statistics Basics\par
\ldblquote Statistics help us summarize and understand data.\rdblquote\par
Common measures:\par
data = [60, 70, 80, 90, 100]\par
print(np.mean(data))\par
print(np.median(data))\par
print(np.var(data))\par
print(np.std(data))\par
Output\par
80.0\par
80.0\par
200.0\par
14.142135623730951\par
\par
Intuition:\par
\bullet\tab Mean \f2\u8594?\f0  average\par
\f1\bullet\tab Variance \f2\u8594?\f0  spread (squared)\par
\f1\bullet\tab Std deviation \f2\u8594?\f0  spread (actual units)\par
\par
\par
\par
Probability Basics\par
\par
\ldblquote Probability measures uncertainty and likelihood.\rdblquote\par
Example use cases:\par
\f1\bullet\tab Spam detection\par
\bullet\tab Prediction confidence\par
\bullet\tab Risk analysis\par
Example (concept):\par
np.random.normal(loc=50, scale=10, size=1000)\par
1000 random values centered around 50\par
\par
NumPy Basics\par
\par
\ldblquote NumPy provides fast numerical operations and vectorized computation.\rdblquote\par
Why NumPy?\par
\bullet\tab Faster than Python lists\par
\bullet\tab Cleaner syntax\par
\bullet\tab Core library for ML & Data Science\par
Indexing\par
\par
\ldblquote Indexing helps access specific rows, columns, or elements.\rdblquote\par
\par
\bullet\tab Examples:\par
\par
\bullet\tab matrix[0] # first row\par
\bullet\tab matrix[:, 2] # third column\par
\bullet\tab matrix[1][1] # specific element\par
\par
Outputs\par
[80 70 90]\par
[90 88 91]\par
75\par
\par
\par
Rule:\par
 Indexing starts from 0\par
\par
\par
Reshaping\par
\par
\ldblquote Reshaping changes the structure, not the data.\rdblquote\par
\par
arr = np.arange(1, 13)\par
arr.reshape(3, 4)\par
\par
Output\par
[[ 1  2  3  4]\par
 [ 5  6  7  8]\par
 [ 9 10 11 12]]\par
\par
\par
Rule:\par
Total elements must remain the same\par
\par
Broadcasting\par
\par
\ldblquote Broadcasting allows NumPy to perform operations between arrays of different shapes.\rdblquote\par
Example:\par
\par
matrix + 10\par
\par
Adds 10 to every element automatically\par
No loops required\par
\par
Conclusion\par
What I\rquote ll say to end:\par
\ldblquote These concepts\emdash vectors, matrices, statistics, and NumPy operations\emdash form the foundation for Machine Learning, data preprocessing, and model building.\rdblquote\par
\par
\ldblquote NumPy makes numerical computation simple, fast, and scalable.\rdblquote\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
Date: 11-05-2026/MONDAY.\par
\par
 \par
\par
What is Pandas in Python\par
\bullet\tab Pandas is an open source Python library used for data manipulation and data analysis.\par
\bullet\tab It provides powerful data structures to work with structured data like tables.\par
\bullet\tab Common uses: \par
o\tab Reading data (CSV, Excel, SQL, JSON)\par
o\tab Cleaning missing or incorrect data\par
o\tab Filtering, grouping, and aggregating data\par
Used mostly when working with datasets.\par
\par
How is it related to Machine Learning (ML)\par
\bullet\tab Pandas is used in the data preprocessing stage of ML.\par
\bullet\tab Before training a model, data must be: \par
o\tab Cleaned\par
o\tab Formatted\par
o\tab Transformed\par
\bullet\tab Pandas helps in: \par
o\tab Handling missing values\par
o\tab Feature selection\par
o\tab Data normalization and encoding\par
Pandas prepares data, ML libraries (like scikit learn, TensorFlow) train models.\par
\par
 What is a Series\par
\bullet\tab A Series is a one dimensional data structure in Pandas.\par
\bullet\tab It is similar to: \par
o\tab A Python list\par
o\tab A single column of a table\par
\bullet\tab It has: \par
o\tab Values\par
o\tab Index (labels)\par
Example idea:\par
Marks = [80, 85, 90]\par
Used to store single column data.\par
\par
What is a Data Frame\par
\bullet\tab A Data Frame is a two dimensional data structure.\par
\bullet\tab It looks like a table (rows \f0\'d7 columns).\par
\f1\bullet\tab Each column in a Data Frame is a Series.\par
\bullet\tab Used for: \par
o\tab Entire datasets\par
o\tab Real world tabular data (Excel sheets, databases)\par
Example idea:\par
Name | Marks\par
A    | 80\par
B    | 85\par
C    | 90\par
Most commonly used Pandas object.\par
\par
One line summary (for quick revision)\par
\bullet\tab Series \f2\u8594?\f0  1D data\par
\f1\bullet\tab Data Frame \f2\u8594?\f0  2D table\par
\f1\bullet\tab Pandas \f2\u8594?\f0  data handling\par
\f1\bullet\tab ML \f2\u8594?\f0  uses cleaned data from Pandas\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
DATA FRAMES\par
 import pandas as pd\par
import numpy as np\par
 \par
data = \{\par
    "EmployeeID": [101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106],\par
    "Name": ["Rahul", "Aisha", "John", "Fatima", "Arjun", "Sara"],\par
    "Department": ["IT", "HR", "IT", "Finance", "HR", "IT"],\par
    "Age": [25, 30, 28, 35, 32, 26],\par
    "Salary": [50000, 45000, 60000, 75000, np.nan, 58000],\par
    "Experience": [2, 5, 4, 10, 7, 3]\par
\}\par
 \par
df = pd.DataFrame(data)\par
 \par
print(df) \par
 \par
 \par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\tab\par
\par
\par
 \par
\par
}
 